Specifications of main functions in the GrainSizeTools script
-------------

####**importdata** (*filePath*, *type = 'txt'*)
Automatically extracts the data corresponding to the areas of grain profiles from the tabular-like data generated by the ImageJ application. To avoid problems use always forward slash (or double backslash) in the filePath. 

> **Parameters:**
> 
> ***filePath***: *string*
> The file location in the OS in quotes.
>
> ***type***: *string; optional*
> The type of the file, either 'txt' or 'csv'
> 
> **Returns**:
> A numpy array with the areas of the grain profilel.

####**calc_diameters** (*areas, addPerimeter = 0*)
Calculate the diameters from the sectional areas via the equivalent circular diameter assuming that the grains have near-equant shapes.

> **Parameters:**
> 
> ***areas***: *array_like*
> The sectional areas of the grains.
> 
> ***addPerimeter***: *integer or float; optional*
> Correct the diameters estimated from the areas by adding the perimeter of the grain. If *addPerimeter* is not declared it is considered 0.

>**Returns**:
> A numpy array with the diameters of the grains.

####**find_grain_size** (*areas, diameters, binsize = 'Scott'*)
Estimate different 1D measures of grain size from a population of apparent diameters and their areas. It includes the mean, the area-weighted mean, the median and the frequency peak grain sizes.

> **Parameters:**
> 
> ***areas***: *array_like*
> The areas of the grain profiles.
> 
> ***diameters***: *array_like*
> The apparent diameters of the grains.
> 
> ***binsize***: *string, integer or float; optional*
> The method used to calculate the bin size. This can be: 'FD' (Fredman-Diaconis rule), 'Scott' (Scott rule) or a
> user-defined scalar constant of type integer or float. If not specified, 'Scott' is used by default.
> 
>**Returns**:
> A number of 1D grain size values to use in paleopiezometry (or paleowattometry) studies and the number and the area-weighted plots. The values includes the mean, the median and the area-weighted mean grain size and the frequency peak via the Gaussian kernel density estimator and the mid-poind of the modal interval. It also provides other values of interest such as the bin size and bandwidth estimated and the methods chosen.

####**derive3D** (*diameters, numbins=10, set_limit=None, fit=False, initial_guess=False*)
Estimates the actual population of diameters from a population of apparent diameters obtained from a thin section. It uses two approaches:
        
i) the standard Saltykov method (Saltykov 1967; Underwood 1970)
ii) the two-step method (Lopez-Sanchez and Llana-Funez, submitted).
    
The Saltykov method is optimal to estimate the volume of particular grain fraction as well as to obtain a qualitative view of the appearance of the actual 3D grain size population, either in uni- or multimodal populations. The two-step method is aimed at quantitatively estimating the actual 3D population of grain size. It is only valid for unimodal populations (*i.e.* completely recrystallized rocks) and returns the shape and scale values that describe the log-normal population of grain sizes as well as a plot.

> **Parameters:**
> 
> ***diameters***: *array_like*
> The apparent diameters of the grains.
> 
> ***numbins***: *integer; optional*
> The number of classes or bins used by the Saltykov method to unfold the population. If not declared, is set to ten by default.
>
> ***set_limit***: *integer or float; optional*
> If the user defines a number, the script will return the volume occupied by the grain fraction of size less than or equal to that value.
>
> ***fit***: *True or False*
> If False, the standard Saltykov method is applied. If True, the two-step method is applied. The Saltykov method is set by default.
>
>***initial_guess***: *True or False*
> If False, the script will use the default guessing values to fit a log-normal distribution. If True, the script will ask the user to define the shape and scale guessing values.
>
>**Returns**:
> In the case of the Saltykov method: The bin size, the frequencies (probabilities) of the different classes and a plot containing two subplots: i) the distribution of the actual grain size population according to the Scheil-Schwartz-Saltykov method and ii) the volume-weighted cumulative distribution. The frequencies are normalized such that the integral over the range is 1. Note that the sum of these values will not be equal to 1 unless bins of unity width are chosen. In the case of the two-step method: The estimated optimal shape and scale values and the precision of the estimation at a 3-sigma level. Also a plot containing the unfolded population using the Saltykov method and the best fitted log-normal density function and its trust region.

[next section](https://github.com/marcoalopez/GrainSizeTools/blob/master/DOCS/references.md)
[table of contents](https://github.com/marcoalopez/GrainSizeTools/blob/master/DOCS/tableOfContents.md)

----------
